                                                             Not to be released until 8:50 a.m.
                                                             Japan Standard Time on Monday,
                                                             August 10, 2026.


                                                                                     August 10, 2026
                                                                                       Bank of Japan


             Summary of Opinions at the Monetary Policy Meeting1,2
                           on July 30 and 31, 2026

I. Opinions on Economic and Financial Developments
Economic Developments
⚫   Japan's economy has recovered moderately, although some weakness has been seen in part,
    partly due to the impact of the situation in the Middle East. In fiscal 2026, although the rise in
    crude oil prices is expected to push down economic activity, Japan's economy is expected to
    continue growing moderately, albeit at a decelerated rate, supported by factors such as global
    AI-related demand and various government measures. From fiscal 2027 onward, Japan's
    economic growth rate is likely to rise moderately, since it is projected that the adverse effects
    of high crude oil prices will wane.

⚫   With the economy experiencing an upswing driven by the demand shock from the global
    expansion in AI-related demand, the deterioration in the terms of trade reflecting higher crude
    oil prices has been mitigated, and concerns over an economic slowdown have subsided.

⚫   For economic activity, the situation in the Middle East exerts downward pressure, the
    expansion in AI-related demand exerts upward pressure, and the depreciation of the yen works
    in both directions.

⚫   As recent reports at the meeting of general managers of the Bank's branches suggested, AI-
    related demand has spread to a greater extent than expected, and private consumption has
    shown resilience, as seen, for example, in strong sales of high-end products reflecting the
    wealth effects from higher stock prices.


1
  English translation prepared by the Bank's staff based on the Japanese original.
2
  "Summary of Opinions at the Monetary Policy Meeting" is made through the following process: (1) each
Policy Board member and government representative makes a summary of opinions that she/he presented
at the Monetary Policy Meeting (MPM) under a certain word limit and submits this to the Governor of the
Bank of Japan, who serves as the chairman of the MPM, and (2) the chairman edits those opinions as his
responsibility.
                                                   1
⚫   Due attention is warranted on the possibility that the economy could deviate downward, should
    expectations regarding the future profitability of AI-related firms diminish and the stock market
    experience significant adjustments.

⚫   In the past, Japan has experienced a significant decline in domestic demand and a deceleration
    in inflation in the face of major external shocks. Nevertheless, Japan's economy has shown
    resilience in the face of U.S. tariff policy and the situation in the Middle East.

⚫   The Cabinet has approved the Basic Policy on Economic and Fiscal Management and Reform
    2026, which advocates "responsible and proactive public finances." This policy is expected to
    raise domestic production, employment, real income, and the inflation rate.

⚫   Since June this year, there has been a significant regime shift in financial conditions
    surrounding Japan, as the phase of policy interest rate cuts seen globally through last year has
    turned to a phase of interest rate hikes.



Prices
⚫   Underlying CPI inflation is likely to increase gradually, as the mechanism in which wages and
    prices rise moderately in interaction with each other is expected to be maintained. Underlying
    CPI inflation is expected to come to a level that is generally consistent with the price stability
    target between the second half of fiscal 2026 and fiscal 2027.

⚫   Given that underlying CPI inflation has been approaching 2 percent, it will be important, from
    the perspective of sustainable and stable achievement of the price stability target, to examine
    whether it becomes anchored at a level around 2 percent.

⚫   For prices, the situation in the Middle East, the expansion in AI-related demand, and the
    depreciation of the yen all exert upward pressure.

⚫   Given factors such as the rise in domestic distribution costs and the increase in the prices of
    packaging materials and food trays, the price hikes in final consumer goods are expected to
    accelerate again toward early autumn.

⚫   While the situation in the Middle East remains unclear, crude oil prices and the benchmark
    price of naphtha have declined from their peak levels reached in April. Moreover, while the
    producer price index (PPI) has risen reflecting the increase in import prices, the CPI has
    remained below 2 percent, due in part to the effects of government policies.



                                                  2
⚫   Supply and demand conditions in the crude oil market are balanced, reflecting factors such as
    an increase in supply as delayed tankers have exited the Persian Gulf. However, once these
    temporary factors dissipate, supply and demand conditions could tighten again.

⚫   In addition to the depreciation of the yen, geopolitical risks and risks associated with climate
    change have been factors pushing up import prices. Strong AI-related demand could also lead
    to an increase in the prices of goods and services. Attention is warranted on upside risks to
    prices throughout the projection period.

⚫   Considering factors such as the future pass-through of higher crude oil prices to consumer
    prices, and Japan's output gap, which indicates supply shortages and excess demand, risks to
    prices are significantly skewed to the upside. In addition, global AI-related demand and
    expansionary fiscal policies in various economies could further boost demand and push up
    prices even more.



II. Opinions on Monetary Policy
⚫   Looking at Japan's financial conditions, the short-term real interest rate -- which has a large
    impact on economic activity -- has been negative, and financial institutions' lending attitudes
    have remained proactive. Meanwhile, firms' and other entities' demand for funds has increased,
    as shown, for example, in the acceleration in the rate of increase in bank lending. In light of
    these developments, Japan's financial conditions have remained accommodative.

⚫   In assessing financial conditions, it is also necessary to take into account factors such as
    whether financing is being implemented under disciplined investment plans.

⚫   It is considered that there is a time lag of around one to one and a half years for the effects of
    a policy interest rate hike to emerge in the form of pushing down the inflation rate and domestic
    economic activity. In order to carefully examine the impact of the rate hike at the previous
    meeting, it is appropriate for the Bank to keep the policy interest rate unchanged at this meeting.

⚫   Given that underlying CPI inflation has been approaching 2 percent and financial conditions
    have been accommodative, it is appropriate for the Bank to continue to raise the policy interest
    rate and adjust the degree of monetary accommodation, in response to developments in
    economic activity and prices as well as financial conditions.

⚫   It is appropriate for the Bank to consider the timing and pace of adjustment to the degree of
    monetary accommodation, while carefully examining the impact of factors such as the situation


                                                  3
    in the Middle East, the expansion in AI-related demand, and developments in foreign exchange
    rates. In doing so, the current phase calls for due attention to upside risks to the underlying
    trend in prices.

⚫   In conducting monetary policy, the perspective of stabilizing underlying CPI inflation at a level
    around 2 percent becomes important in order to keep the risk of underlying CPI inflation
    deviating upward to a level above the price stability target of 2 percent from materializing and
    thereby exerting an adverse impact on the economy afterward.

⚫   In the conduct of monetary policy, when assessing whether underlying CPI inflation will
    stabilize in a manner consistent with the price stability target, it is necessary to carefully
    monitor whether medium- to long-term inflation expectations -- which have been rising
    recently -- stabilize at around 2 percent.

⚫   Given that underlying CPI inflation has been approaching 2 percent and greater consideration
    should be given to upside risks to prices than before, it could be considered that the pace of
    policy interest rate hikes will be faster than market expectations, depending on developments
    in economic activity and prices as well as financial conditions.

⚫   Underlying CPI inflation in Japan is becoming anchored at around 2 percent. With financial
    conditions remaining accommodative, it is important for the Bank to pay particular attention
    to upside risks to prices and adjust the policy interest rate nimbly.

⚫   Even if the precise neutral interest rate cannot be determined, it is necessary for the Bank to
    raise the policy interest rate, which is below the lower bound of the broadly estimated range,
    in order to set a foundation for the normalization of monetary policy and to ensure the
    nimbleness of policy decisions.

⚫   As the global environment is turning to a phase of policy interest rate hikes, the situation has
    shifted to a new phase in which the Bank needs to adopt a nimble approach in response to
    factors such as changes in overseas financial conditions and to discuss the size of a rate hike,
    rather than adhering to a certain pace of rate hikes. As concerns over a downward deviation in
    real economic activity have subsided and inflationary pressures could become evident from the
    summer, it is necessary for the Bank to shift from the current stance of encouraging a rise in
    underlying inflation and to clearly demonstrate to the market its determination to prevent
    upward deviations in prices.




                                                  4
⚫   Should upside risks to prices materialize, it would not only deliver a significant blow to Japan's
    economy and to people's daily lives but would also compel the Bank to later make rapid and
    substantial policy interest rate hikes, causing a double shock. The focus of monetary policy has
    shifted from "lifting underlying CPI inflation to 2 percent" to "avoiding further upward
    deviation in underlying CPI inflation." It cannot be said that "the risk of waiting is marginal,"
    and it is therefore necessary for the Bank to accelerate the pace of adjustment to the degree of
    monetary accommodation.

⚫   While long-term interest rates rose in early July, policies in various countries have attracted
    attention in financial markets recently as a factor influencing daily market movements.



III. Opinions from Government Representatives
Ministry of Finance
⚫   Regarding the 2026 Kumamoto Earthquake, the government will mobilize its full capabilities,
    with saving lives as its highest priority.

⚫   Based on the Basic Policy on Economic and Fiscal Management and Reform 2026, the
    government will strive to achieve both "building a strong Japanese economy" and "fiscal
    sustainability" in an integrated manner, while giving consideration to securing market
    confidence.

⚫   The government expects the Bank to conduct monetary policy as appropriate toward
    sustainable and stable achievement of the price stability target of 2 percent, while closely
    cooperating with the government, paying due attention to factors such as economic
    developments at home and abroad, and communicating effectively with the market.



Cabinet Office
⚫   The government will closely monitor the impact of the 2026 Kumamoto Earthquake on the
    livelihoods of those affected and on the economy.

⚫   As the economy and public finances are entering a new phase, the government will strive to
    secure market confidence through achieving both building a strong Japanese economy and
    fiscal sustainability in a simultaneous manner and through strengthening communication,
    based on the Basic Policy on Economic and Fiscal Management and Reform 2026 and
    embracing an approach of responsible and proactive public finances.



                                                 5
⚫   Toward building a strong Japanese economy, it is extremely important that monetary policy be
    conducted as appropriate in a manner that contributes to achieving stable inflation. The
    government expects the Bank to conduct monetary policy as appropriate toward achieving the
    price stability target of 2 percent in a sustainable and stable manner, while closely cooperating
    with the government.




                                                 6
